| ← Previous | ↑ | Next → |
| :-- | :-: | --: |
| [Architecture](./1.architecture.md) | [Go to index](../README.md#index) | [Data model and access](./3.data-model-and-access.md) |

# Routes and shell

The base template comes with a `website` feature folder (within the `app`) where the static pages live. We could've added more pages and components here to build our logbook app, but it's better to separate it out into a dedicated feature folder ([`app/src/app/logbook/`](../app/src/app/logbook/)) and lazily load it only when the user navigates to a particular URL — `/logbook` in this case — as registered in the top-level app routes file:

<https://github.com/FullStacksDev/angular-and-firebase-simple-example-app/blob/7573043239af19257b40c3c2b19c6b5bc98d3b27/app/src/app/app.routes.ts#L9-L12>

Here, the use of an `import` for the `loadChildren` property tells Angular to separate out the code for the logbook feature into its own bundle and only load it when the user navigates to `/logbook`.

| **:white_check_mark: Pattern** |
| :-- |
| Always separate out distinct parts of your app into separate feature folders and lazily-loaded routes. This improves the initial load time of your app as it won't need to fetch everything as part of the initial page request. |

Let's now look at the routes for the logbook feature itself:

<https://github.com/FullStacksDev/angular-and-firebase-simple-example-app/blob/7573043239af19257b40c3c2b19c6b5bc98d3b27/app/src/app/logbook/logbook.routes.ts#L9-L25>

- We define a parent route that will load the `LogbookShellComponent`, with child routes defined within.
  - This shell component has a `<router-outlet>` in its template where a matching child route will have it's component placed in to.
  - This route has a path of `''` since it's a parent (or "container") route of the logbook feature, and we don't want to specify the main path here. Instead, when plugged into the top-level app routes file it will be registered at `/logbook`, lazily, as shown above.
- We use the `authGuard` provided by the base template to lock down all routes within this feature to authenticated users only.
- We register providers for the `ConfigStore`, `EntriesStore` and `EntriesUpdateStore` services that are used by the logbook feature.
  - This tells Angular to manage single instances of these services that can be injected in any component used in the routing tree (and all child components).
  - Note: these are different to the **data access** services. We'll cover both the store and data access services in a later document.
- The only child route we have for this feature is for the `LogbookPageComponent` which will be loaded for the default route as well (i.e. when the user navigates to `/logbook`).

| **:white_check_mark: Pattern** |
| :-- |
| By using this structure of a parent route with a shell component and then child routes within it, we give ourselves lots of flexibility in implementing a feature — we can use guards to secure all the child routes at once, we can have common UI and navigation elements in the shell component, and we can have services provided at the route level to be used across all components in the router components tree. |

At the moment, the [`app/src/app/logbook/logbook-shell.component.ts`](../app/src/app/logbook/logbook-shell.component.ts) only has a `<router-outlet>` in its template (where the matching child route component is rendered). In your app, you could imagine adding a header, footer, sidebar, or any other common UI elements here.

> [!NOTE]
>
> In order to use the `<router-outlet>` (and any other component, directive or pipe) you need to import the corresponding definition in your component's `imports` array. In this particular case, the `imports` array of the `LogbookShellComponent` is: `imports: [RouterOutlet]`. This is importing just the router outlet from Angular.
>
> You may have previously seen folks importing `RouterModule`, which comes with lots of other router related bits. This is no longer necessary as almost everything in Angular now has standalone definitions that you can import directly.

> [!TIP]
>
> You can use the Angular CLI to easily generate components, directives, pipes, guards and services.
>
> For example, the `LogbookShellComponent` was originally generated using the command: `pnpm ng g c logbook/logbook-shell` (note the folder structure in this command — for pages and smart components you'll want to generate them in the feature's `{feature_name}/feature` folder, and for presentational components in the `{feature_name}/ui` folder).
>
> We use `pnpm ng` because we want to make sure we're executing the version of the Angular CLI that's installed in the project (and not a global one that might be a different version).
>
> Note: the base template comes with some defaults configured for the generation of components, services, etc. You can see these in the [`app/angular.json`](../app/angular.json) file under the `schematics` property.

In the next few documents we dig into how the feature is built.

> [!NOTE]
>
> In the advanced example app we showcase a bigger feature with multiple pages and a shell component that provides a common UI and navigation elements. All of this uses a more complex route structure with multiple child routes and route parameters.

---

| ← Previous | ↑ | Next → |
| :-- | :-: | --: |
| [Architecture](./1.architecture.md) | [Go to index](../README.md#index) | [Data model and access](./3.data-model-and-access.md) |
